[improve] [pip] PIP-299: Stop dispatch messages if the individual acks will be lost in the persistent storage (#21118)
apache/pulsar: pip/pip-299.md

Note: `managedLedgerMaxAckStateInBytesToPersist` and `managedLedgerMaxUnackedRangesToPersist` are conflicting configurations. If the two configurations are set at the same time, only `managedLedgerMaxAckStateInBytesToPersist` takes effect.

**Pause delivery messages if reaches the limitation**
Cache the size of the cursor metadata in memory when doing persistent data to BK. We call the cache name `cursorMetadataSizeInMemoryBytes.` 

Note:
- Since we will not update `cursorMetadataSizeInMemoryBytes` each time acknowledgment, `cursorMetadataSizeInMemoryBytes` is not a real-time value.
- The delayed messages will also not be redelivered after reaching the limitation.

Provide a new config named `dispatcherPauseOnAckPersistentStateEnabled,` stuck delivery messages to clients if the size of the cursor metadata could not persist due to it being too large.

# Detailed Design
### Public API

**broker.conf**
```java
/** 
 * Max bytes size of the cursor metadata. If it reaches this limitation, Pulsar will not try to persist cursor metadata(including ack state).
 * The value of this property should be between 1K and 5M. The default value is 5M.
 */

> long managedLedgerMaxAckStateInBytesToPersist;

Reviewer: Is it better to move this change to a separate proposal?

- This proposal: Stop dispatch messages if the individual acks will be lost in the persistent storage
- Another proposal: Support size-based ack state persistence, because the ranges-bases configuration is not easy to be understand by users.

Author: Good suggestion. Current PIP only contains the design of stop dispatch messages if the individual acks will be lost in the persistent storage now. And I will submit another PIP to do the second part after the current PIP is done.

The data of cursor metadata is recommended to be less than 5MB; if a subscription's `Individual Deleted Messages` data is too large to persist, as the program grows for a long time, there will be more and more non-persistent data. Eventually, there will be an unacceptable amount of repeated consumption of messages when the Broker restarts.

# Goal

## In Scope

To avoid repeated consumption due to the cursor metadata being too large to persist.

## Out of Scope

This proposal will not care about this scenario: if so many producers make the metadata of cursor `pulsar.dedup` cannot persist, the task `Take Deduplication Snapshot` will be in vain due to the inability to persist.

# High-Level Design

Cache the size of the cursor metadata in memory when doing persistent data to BK. We call the cache name `persistedCursorMetadataSizeInBytes.` 

Provide a new config named `maxUnPersistAckRecordsBytesPerSubscription,` stuck delivery messages to clients if the size of the cursor metadata reaches the limit.

Note:
- Since we will not update `persistedCursorMetadataSizeInBytes` each time acknowledgment, `persistedCursorMetadataSizeInBytes` is not a real-time value.

> - The delayed messages will also not be redelivered after reaching the limitation.

Reviewer: Instead of using a new size-based control. We can only add a configuration to stop the message delivery when the subscription reaches the persistent threshold of the acknowledgment state. For example:

```
dispatcherPauseOnAckPersistentStateEnabled=false
```

Now, we have `managedLedgerMaxUnackedRangesToPersist`, but it's not good for end users to understand. We can try to add `managedLedgerMaxAckStateInBytesToPersist`.

The newly added `dispatcherPauseOnAckPersistentStateEnabled=false` can work with `managedLedgerMaxUnackedRangesToPersist` and  `managedLedgerMaxAckStateInBytesToPersist`.

The major reason I want to raise this approach is that if you put them together like the following, it will be a little confusing.

```
managedLedgerMaxUnackedRangesToPersist
managedLedgerMaxAckStateInBytesToPersist
maxUnPersistAckRecordsBytesPerSubscription
```

But this one looks better.

```
dispatcherPauseOnAckPersistentStateEnabled
managedLedgerMaxUnackedRangesToPersist
managedLedgerMaxAckStateInBytesToPersist
```

Author: Good suggestion. I changed these config names.

# Goal

## In Scope

To avoid repeated consumption due to the cursor metadata being too large to persist.

## Out of Scope

This proposal will not care about this scenario: if so many producers make the metadata of cursor `pulsar.dedup` cannot persist, the task `Take Deduplication Snapshot` will be in vain due to the inability to persist.

# High-Level Design

Provide a new config named `dispatcherPauseOnAckStatePersistentEnabled`(default value is `false`) for a new feature: stop dispatch messages to clients when reaching the limitation `managedLedgerMaxUnackedRangesToPersist`.
- If the user does not care about that Individual Deleted Messages can not be fully persistent, resulting in a large number of repeated message consumption, then it can be set to `false`.
- If the user cares about repeated consumption, at can accept a decline in consumption speed when cursor metadata is too large to persist, it can be set to `true`.

# Detailed Design
### Public API

**broker.conf**
```
/**

>  * After enabling this feature, Pulsar will stop delivery messages to clients if the cursor metadata is too large to persist, it will help to reduce the repeated consumption caused by the ack state that can not be fully persistent. Default "false".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * After enabling this feature, Pulsar will stop delivery messages to clients if the cursor metadata is too large to persist, it will help to reduce the duplicates caused by the ack state that can not be fully persistent. Default "false".
```

 */
boolean dispatcherPauseOnAckStatePersistentEnabled;
```

**SubscriptionStats**
```java
/**
 * After enabling the feature "dispatcherPauseOnAckStatePersistentEnabled", return "true" if the cursor metadata is too large to persist, else return "false".
 * Always return "false" if disabled the feature "dispatcherPauseOnAckStatePersistentEnabled".
 */

> boolean isBlockedSubscriptionOnAckStatePersistent();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
boolean isBlockedOnAckStatePersistent();
```

# Goal

## In Scope

To avoid repeated consumption due to the cursor metadata being too large to persist.

## Out of Scope

This proposal will not care about this scenario: if so many producers make the metadata of cursor `pulsar.dedup` cannot persist, the task `Take Deduplication Snapshot` will be in vain due to the inability to persist.

# High-Level Design

Provide a new config named `dispatcherPauseOnAckPersistentStateEnabled` for a new feature: stop dispatch messages to clients when reaching the limitation `managedLedgerMaxUnackedRangesToPersist`.
- If the user does not care about that Individual Deleted Messages can not be fully persistent, resulting in a large number of repeated message consumption, then it can be set to `false`.
- If the user cares about repeated consumption, at can accept a decline in consumption speed when cursor metadata is too large to persist, it can be set to `true`.

# Detailed Design
### Public API

**broker.conf**
```
/**
 * If true, the dispatcher will pause the delivery of messages to clients if the cursor metadata(including ack state) reaches ${managedLedgerMaxAckStateInBytesToPersist}.
 * The default value is "true".

>  * Note: If you set it to "false," when cursor metadata reaches ${managedLedgerMaxAckStateInBytesToPersist}, it can not persist, which might lead to repeated consumption.

Reviewer: The description is incorrect. We don't have `managedLedgerMaxAckStateInBytesToPersist` for now.

Author: Already corrected the description. Thanks

 */

> boolean dispatcherPauseOnAckPersistentStateEnabled;

Reviewer: Sorry, I think I provided a bad name before.

`dispatcherPauseOnAckStatePersistentEnabled` is better?

Author: > dispatcherPauseOnAckStatePersistentEnabled is better?

Agree, changed the config name to `dispatcherPauseOnAckStatePersistentEnabled `

```

## Design & Implementation Details

Cache the range count of the Individual Deleted Messages in the memory when doing persist cursor metadata to BK. Stuck delivery messages to clients if reaching the limitation `managedLedgerMaxUnackedRangesToPersist`.

Since the cache will not be updated in time, the actual count will decrease when clients acknowledge messages(but it does not persist immediately, so the cached value does not update immediately), the cached value is an estimated value.

# Metrics

**pulsar_cursor_meta_too_large_to_persist_state**
- Description:
    - 0: The cursor metadata size is fine.
    - 1: The cursor metadata is too large to persist.
- type: Enumeration
- labels: `[cluster, namespace, topic, subscription]`

# Alert

> - If `pulsar_cursor_meta_too_large_to_persist_state` is `1` for a long time, it indicates that the client might be stuck due to something wrong.

Reviewer: Hmm, I don't think we need a new metric. If the message dispatch is stopped due to the acknowledgment state persistence. The backlog will continue to increase. Users usually only need to monitor the backlog.

Instead, I think we should add a new field to topic stats like `blockedSubscriptionOnUnackedMsgs`. 
Maybe we can use `blockedSubscriptionOnAckStatePersistent`

Author: Removed the metrics and added a subscription stat `isBlockedSubscriptionOnAckStatePersistent`
